the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
view additional materials from hundreds
of MIT courses visit MIT opencourseware
at
ocw.mit.edu all right good morning
everyone let's get started a new new
module today we're going to uh spend a
few lectures on uh on randomized
algorithms and so um not only will we
look at U slightly different ways of
solving old problems like
sorting uh we'll also look at how we can
analyze this new kind of algorithm that
generates random numbers uh in order to
actually make decisions as it's
executing and uh we'll end up obviously
uh with u analysis that uh gives us uh
the expected runtime of the algorithm
for
example or uh whether the algorithm is
going to produce the correct result or
not with what probability will this
algorithm produce a correct result so
I'll talk a little bit about uh why
we're interested in randomized
algorithms in a in a couple of minutes
but let me
Define what uh a randomized algorithm or
a probabilistic algorithm
is to start things
off and so randomized algorithm
is something
that generates a random
number now this could be a coin
flip but more often than not you're
generating u a real
number that comes from a certain
range sometimes you're generating a
vector you'll see a different uh a
couple of different examples here in
today's
lecture uh and in and in
section and it's going to make
decisions based on this
value based on
R's actual value
now you can imagine that an algorithm
would be recursive and at every level of
recursion it's going to generate a
random R and so uh when you're executing
at a particular level of recursion you
may be doing different things uh based
based on R and not only that if you
rerun the algorithm again on the same
input the execution will be different
because U you're assuming a true random
number generator as opposed to a a Pudo
random one uh and and the RS that you're
going to get at different levels of
recursion or through the execution of
the algorithm are going to be different
from the first time to the second
time so on the same
input on different
executions two things might
happen um the algorithm may run for a
different number number of
steps so you might get lucky on the
first execution and the algorithm
finishes let's say in 100 time units the
second time around it takes a a long
time it takes 700 time units um our goal
here is to try and analyze what this
probabilistic runtime would be to ask
for um an expectation to be able to
compute an expectation
for the runtime or if you're talking
about a
different scenario where different
executions I could actually produce
different in different
outputs and in this case um it's
possible that uh uh one or more of these
outputs are incorrect you actually get
the wrong answer uh and uh obviously uh
that's going to happen with a certain
probability we're going to have to
u to decide or analyze what that
probability is and uh generally speaking
we won't be happy with a high
probability of error as you can imagine
and we'd like to set up an algorithm
such that you can reduce that
probability of incorrect output to be
something really really small uh and
it might take you uh longer to get to
that that uh low level of uh incorrect
error or incorrect output uh in one case
uh for a certain set of inputs versus
another case right so uh that's this
setup here in terms of randomized um
you're going to have algorithms that are
uh you can think of them as uh probably
correct okay so these are
algorithms you want to think of them as
probably correct and they do have a a
name they're called Monte Carlo
algorithms um and then you have
algorithms that are probably
fast
so in the case of pro probably correct
uh you you could you know have a
constant probability that they're going
to give you the correct answer
99% uh and you could obviously try and
parameterize that in the case of
probably fast um you say things like it
runs an expected polinomial time and um
really what that means is that uh you
may have to run it uh for more
iterations so rather than taking uh 100
iterations or 100 uh steps to sort
something it might take you 110 right
but in the case of probably fast you do
get the sorted result at the end and
when the algorithm is finished execution
you do get that sort of result at the
end so correct and probably fast um or
uh uh probably correct and uh
deterministically fast okay and this is
this is Las Vegas so you have Monte
Carlo versus Las Vegas here um so I uh
yesterday I and it occurred to me and
I've thought this class A bunch of times
but it occurred to me for the first time
last night that there should be
algorithms that are uh probably correct
and probably fast which means that
they're Incorrect and slow you know some
of the time right so what do you think
those algorithms are
called sorry what the T the T oh oh that
deserves a frisbee oh my
goodness all right here you go there you
go all right now they're not called the
T okay so we should write that down for
uh so so everyone knows uh probably
correct and probably fast which is I
guess yeah I I guess they don't get you
anywhere I don't know what that means
Incorrect and slow in the case of the T
um uh so the MBTA huh okay now that's
that's not the any guesses I mean think
about uh what we have for uh for Monte
Carlo Las Vegas you
extrapolate these are the kinds of
questions you're going to get on your
quiz so what other you I guess you guys
don't get you don't go to yeah yeah go
ahead Atlantic City that deserves a
frisbee yeah absolutely right there're
actually it turns out Atlantic City uh
isn't uh isn't a name that's really
caught on uh but it was uh in terms of
uh being used in this
context uh most of the time if you do
have a probably correct probably fast
algorithm you can convert it into a
Monte Carlo algorithm or a Las Vegas
algorithm there are some uh Prime
testing algorithms uh to test whether a
particular number is a prime or not that
run in probabilistic polinomial time and
they may incorrectly tell you that uh
the number is a prime so that's uh an
example of an Atlantic City algorithm um
we won't actually do Atlantic City uh
what we'll do is we'll take a look at u
a couple of different algorithms and and
both of these will motivate why
randomized algorithms are interesting
the uh Monte Carlo example is is
checking Matrix multiply so you've
gotten a couple of square matrices both
of them are n byn matrices and uh you
multiplied them out a * B and you
produce C and so you got the C Matrix
and I rather than REM multiplying and
checking the result you'd like to do
something better uh you'd like to verify
with some probability that you can
parameterize that the output Matrix is
in fact the product of the two input
matrices and so that's a randomized
algorithm that's Monte Carlo because
you're not guaranteeing that that output
Matrix is in fact the product of um the
first two matrices or the operand
matrices but you're getting a good sense
of uh of uh How likely that is and you
can kind of Squish that probability of
error down to uh um how low you want it
to uh be except you have run it run the
algorithm for longer right so that's
that's an example of Monte Carlo now
quick sort it doesn't make sense to say
you you I guess you could but it doesn't
make too much sense to say that you have
an almost sorted array right uh um what
does that mean exactly you have to
characterize that so quick sort is an
example where you're guaranteed to get a
sorted array at the end of it right so
it's correct you will get a sorted array
that's what you wanted descending order
ascending order but uh it might not
run in uh order log n log n time uh you
can't that's expected time order n log n
is expected time right so that's what
probably fast uh would correspond to all
right so uh so that's the setup uh you
can kind of see why these are
interesting because you could imagine
that in Practical scenarios uh you might
want to do some checking in a in a
probabilistic way uh uh and uh you want
to do that with having to redo all the
work right you don't want to you you
don't want obviously you don't want your
checker for Matrix multiply to be as
slow as multiplying the two matrices
otherwise it makes no sense so let's
dive into u a matrix product and our
first example
of a probably correct algorithm a Monte
Carlo algorithm so what I want to do
here is c equal a * B
and the simple
algorithm I guess those of us who went
to high
school myself
included did my four
years um know of an N cubed algorithm or
learned it back then uh that it simply
corresponds to uh taking rows and uh and
and columns and uh uh you you get get an
entry you have n Square uh entries that
you need to compute corresponding to the
output Matrix C and uh you're going to
do um order and
multiplications and additions but we're
really going to consider multiplications
here when I talk about n here it's not
the total number of operations it's the
number of multiplications and the reason
for that is I this may have gone away a
little bit but uh it's still probably
true that multiplication is just uh in
computer it takes longer uh to multiply
two numbers uh integers or floating
Point numbers than adding numbers um
used to be much more dramatic the
difference between a multiply and an add
uh in in in uh uh computers but you know
thanks to pipelining and lots of
optimizations uh multiplies are actually
very fast but uh they are obviously a
more
sophisticated operation than addition so
we'll be counting multiplies right so so
when you've seen CaRu
divide and concer for multiply you know
back in6 I remember that we were
counting multiplications and we were
actually trading off multiplications for
additions we were trying to shrink that
uh that number associated with the
complexity of the algorithm when
counting the number of multiplies and if
you actually counted the number of
additions they were they were going up
at least from a constant Factor
standpoint not necessarily from an ASM
totic complexity standpoint um and so
that's the simple algorithm um youve
probably heard of Sten some of you might
have seen it um Bas essentially what
happens with Sten is you multiply two 2x
two
matrices um using seven multiplications
as opposed to
eight and so now if you do that and this
is similar to the katuba analysis you
get uh you can you can do this in N ra
to log 27 time which is uh essentially n
ra to
2.81 time and so rather than n cubed you
can go down to n uh n ra to
2.81 now it turns out people have
obviously uh not stopped with this uh
you can go to n ra
2.70 by doing something of the order of
143,000 multiplications for 70 by 70
matrices right so you can play around
just like you had tomb cook I don't know
if you remember that or it got covered
but you know caruba could get
generalized into this thing called tomb
cook and uh and the same thing Sten you
could go off and and do uh uh divide and
conquer that uh uh whose base case is
not 2 by two but 70 by 70 and that
improves things but it turns out uh you
know there's other ways arithmetic
series summation ways and so a famous
algorithm that up until
2010 was the uh was the best complexity
uh algorithm known was copper Smith
Winograd which is uh
2376 and then at some point we had a
faculty candidate here who uh who uh um
uh uh you know shrunk this from 2.37 6
to
2373 um and it turns out that uh there
were two different uh researchers who
came up with the 2373 but this
particular candidate you know in the six
decimal place won right so she had an
eight and the other person had a nine or
something but anyway all of these are
impractical okay you you don't want to
use them the the constant factors
associated with these things are much
larger uh than uh what you have here I
mean the constant factors here are I
guess it's one right make sense that it
would be one yeah
um so uh forgetting the additions of
course right so if you have large
constant factors then you need a billion
by a billion Matrix in order to win and
if you have you know billion by billion
matrices that you want to multiply do
something else okay uh you don't want to
go there uh even in even even in the day
of the Internet it's it's not going to
work so uh what we'd like to do now is
do something better so we will try given
that I
we are uh theoretical uh computer
science class um it makes sense to say
that our verification algorithm should
be better than n raised to 2376 or 2.3
whatever right uh otherwise it you know
it doesn't feel good right so um so what
we'd like to do and we can do this is uh
try and get um an order n Square
algorithm
uh that uh does this so it's um a
probably correct Monte Carlo algorithm
where if you have a * b equal
C then the probability of the
output equals
yes is is one so in fact uh if you got
it right then the verifier is going to
not give you a a false negative right
it's not going to say no you got it
wrong when you got it right uh but it
could give you a a false positive with
some
probability where you have the
probability
of
output equals yes and that's a false
positive but you can bound that to be
less than half okay so it's going to say
yes so I mean obviously if the verifier
kept saying yes all the time uh it you
would't have this right it wouldn't be
very interesting it would be constant
time uh but uh it it wouldn't be very
interesting uh what is interesting here
is that uh uh when they're not equal uh
you're going to get an incorrect result
with with some upper bound on the
probability right and so so you say well
1 half it seems kind of high you know
50% you know flipping a coin the good
news is that uh you these algorithms can
uh you can run them over and over you
can run this Checker um over and over
and as long as the executions are
independent and you can certainly ensure
that they're Independent by ensuring
that the randomness from one execution
to another the flipping of the coins are
independent okay and so that's
relatively easy to do and certainly in
all of the scenarios we'll be looking at
in know for six is relatively easy to do
you can now drive this probability down
to one quarter with two executions uh
because you'll just check different
things and then 1/ 18 with three and so
on and so forth right so that's what's
cool about it and now if you kind of
look at the runtime you say well runtime
is still order than Square now that's
the beauty of this right because I'm
just putting an extra constant Factor
here where I have K and square right
where K is a constant and I got this uh
effectively I have this nice
relationship in terms of the probability
um of error going down to 1 / 2 raed to
K right and what I have here is a KNN
square right so so that's what's cool
about it and obviously KNN square is
still order n Square in a polinomial
time and but the the probably correct
aspect of it gets better and better okay
um any questions so
far all right right
good so what we're going to do is uh
this algorithm actually works uh for uh
arbitrary matrices at the structure at
least we're going to assume that the
Matrix entries are are Boolean or we're
going to work in the the finite field
mod two and it's just an easier proof uh
it's easier to see so uh the
complexities are the same you're still
multiplying numbers they happen to be
small a multiplication costs you one
operation and you need to do n cubed
multiplies to actually get the C Matrix
and you have to uh uh verify it in order
and square time right and so the number
of multiplies again that you want uh to
use in your verification algorithm has
to be order and square right we're
ignoring the additions
right um so uh that's that's what we'd
like out of our Matrix uh product
Checker and the algorithm we're going to
look at is called free walls
algorithm cute little algorithm that uh
does uh the following so so the
algorithm itself is very straightforward
you know a couple of lines a minute or
so to describe and the the the
interesting aspect of it is the analysis
the fact that uh you can show this
that's that's the cool part if you could
show that there's nothing cool about
this
algorithm so we're going to
choose um a
random binary Vector so there you
go here's your
Randomness and this binary Vector every
time you run it as the K increases here
the random binary Vector is different
from one to another that's important you
can't run the same thing again and then
expect a different result right that's
called Insanity U but uh
you are going to assume that uh given
that we're working in the
space the binary space and this is a
binary
Vector
uh you can assume that r i equal 1 is
half
independently for I = 1 through n and
and the algorithm
essentially is this we're going to do a
bunch of Matrix Vector multiplies okay
uh a matrix an N byn
Matrix multiplied by an N byn
Matrix gives you an N byn Matrix and
that's your n cubed right so these are
all I think I said this but I should
have written this down these are all
square matrices that are n byn and
that's where you get your n Cube um a
matrix Vector would be something where
you have typically we have a column
Vector here you're going to get
something like that and uh you have n
Square multiplications here right so
each uh you you got to grab one of these
uh and then multiply it by that and get
an entry here and that obviously is um n
multiplications uh but you only have n
elements to produce here in this Vector
so you only got n squ
right that Mak sense um and so so what
we're going to do is we're going to take
this R and we're going to compute a * BR
R and so the brackets are important
because uh it says that you're going to
compute what's inside the brackets first
okay otherwise it' be a problem because
you'd be multiplying a * B and obviously
that's order n Cub right you don't want
that so A * BR R equals CR
okay so R remember is a is a column
vector and C is an N byn Matrix as are A
and B we're going to
Output
yes um
else if if these two are not equal
you're going to
Output
no
okay and so that's it that's one
run of the algorithm generate a random R
and do the do the
multiplication uh as you see here so
let's uh uh be uh clear about complexity
uh and uh let's make
sure we understand the simpler aspects
of the algorithm before we get into the
analysis associated with bounding the
false positive probability okay that the
Heart part is going to be bounding the
false positive probability um and so uh
but the easy part is uh first the
complexity right and uh so how many how
many Matrix Vector products am I doing
here how many Matrix Vector products am
I doing here in this check on one ex
iteration of the algorithm yeah three
all right uh all right you need to stand
up
this is fun this is this is this is the
the hardest throw I've had to make in
6046 I got to put this down warm up a
little bit right so yeah it's kind of
cold you know what
you whoa terrible all right uh you can
the person who gets up and gets that
owns it and we're going to do this again
right all right let's let's see how long
this takes is this yes well the first
one fail you know false whatever right
all right
I got a few
more all let me see I think I need to go
here right this is good and I need to uh
I need to
be all right number three thank you
thank you all right
so so um it was three right three
perfect uh three Matrix Vector products
because I got to do this that's the
Matrix Vector product remember I'm
getting a column Vector out of this
which is important and and then I'm
going to multiply this Matrix with the
column Vector Matrix Vector product
number two and then there's a matri VOR
Vector product over here right so then
at that point remember I have a vector
and a vector and checking the
equivalence of two vectors is simply
checking the equivalence of each element
in the vector uh one by one so first one
same as the first one second one the
same as the second one
Etc um and so so so this is order and
square but three is is is something that
is worth thinking about simply because
every once in a while we're interested
in constant factors and the other thing
that's interesting about this um make
sure I write this let
me write this over here um
that uh you are going to uh if um
AB uh equals
c uh then and uh there's no issue
associated with uh error here right so
there's no notion of a of a false
negative because if AB equals c then uh
you know thanks to the
associativity of U matrix multiplication
be it whether they're n byn matrices or
um or columns you have
uh this relationship here and I hope you
can read it at the back essentially what
I have here is if a equals c so if in
fact uh The Matrix multiply happened
correctly uh I'm in a situation where um
it is clear that AB R equals uh this
thanks to the associativity of a matrix
multiply and that of course is exactly
the same as as CR right so that should
convince you uh thanks to associativity
of Matrix multiply that you don't have
any false negatives in this algorithm
right make
sense um so we're all good all we have
to do uh given uh what we have with
respect to freeall is to do this part
here which is going to take a little bit
of doing um and the challenge always
with a simple algorithms is you don't
quite know why they work and then of
course you know you have sophisticated
algorithms and you don't quite know
where they
work but
so this will take a few minutes it's not
super complicated there's a little
insight as always with these things that
are not immediately obvious uh but we'll
have to um look at uh the number of
RS uh the so you have an R Vector that
you've generated randomly and it may be
a bad Vector it may be a vector that
doesn't show you that the two
matrices or the product Matrix has an
incorrect entry remember there's n
Square entries in the in this Matrix
exactly one of them may be wrong and you
need to find it right uh uh and so there
may be a lot of entries which are all
correct but you got to find that one
entry that's incorrect and so you could
miss it a given R Vector might miss it
and of course now if you keep generating
the RS you'd like to find it uh and uh
decare that the matrices Wen multiplied
correctly uh and that probability is
what we have to compute so uh we want to
get
this result where we're analyzing the
correctness um in the case we've already
analyzed the correctness uh in the case
where um AB equals c but now we have to
analyze the correctness in the case
where AB is not equal to C right um and
so uh the claim
is that if a
is not equal to
C
then the probability of a r not equal to
C is greater than or equal to half right
so this is greater than or equal to over
there I'm just talking about the false
negative probability where I'm actually
getting an incorrect yes when you have
uh the matrices being multiplied um uh
uh wrongly incorrectly and so that's why
I get uh this is what I want I want
there to be a a greater than 1/2
probability for
R to be
um uh to have discovered that for for R
to have discovered that okay uh I'll
stop for questions in a second in case
but let me do a little bit
more I'm going to compute the difference
Matrix uh and I'm not Computing this
because obviously this would take a
while to compute it's just for the
purpose of analysis
I'm going to look at this difference
Matrix D equal a minus C because you
want D to be zero and we're going to do
some analysis that says we're going to
try and find these nonzero entries in D
because clearly the nonzero entries in d
are tell you if there's non-zero entry
in D you got a problem here the matrices
we multiplied properly right so so
that's why we have D here don't think of
it as we're actually Computing that
um so what we'd like is
um uh is uh to as I said discover these
entries where our hypothesis now is that
D is not equal to zero because that's
the case we're considering we know that
D is not equal to Zer if the matrices
were multiplied
incorrectly and when I say d is not
equal to zero it means that there are n
Square entries in D and one of them is
not zero right it they all have to be
identically zero that's all it means d
not equal to zero means one entry at
least is not
zero and so now what we need to do is we
need to
show
that there are many R there's obviously
uh it's a binary Vector of length n and
you can obviously you think about 2 ra
to n possibilities with respect to R and
what we really want to show is that that
there's a large fraction more than half
of the RS are going to actually discover
uh that that the matrices were were
multiplied incorrectly okay so we want
to we want to show that there many
RS uh such that Dr is not equal to
zero and because if Dr is not equal to
zero then uh you're obviously going to
discover that AB r
is not equal to CR right so if a r is
not equal to CR that's identical to
saying that Dr is not equal to zero that
Mak
sense um
so
specifically if you look at the claim
and writing it in terms of Dr we want to
say that the
probability of Dr not equal to zero is
greater than or equal to
half for a randomly chosen
R okay this is
looking and so that's it that's the
setup uh that uh we have to show we have
to do a counting argument corresponding
to uh these R vectors that are being
generated randomly so let's do
that um
so the general argument we're going to
make here is simply that we're going to
uh roughly speaking we're going to look
at a bad R what's a bad r a bad R is
something that doesn't Discover the
incorrect
multiplication right that's what a bad R
is so um your your D is not equal to
zero but Dr equals zero okay that's a
bad R right it's quite possible that
that would be the case um and so uh uh
you you want to try and figure out how
many of these bad RS are there because
those are the ones that are causing the
the false
uh negatives right uh um
so uh that counting argument is the Crux
of uh the proof of the claim right so
let's let's look at that um and what
we're going to do is we're going to pick
a bad R and we're going to say there
these good RS that are associated with
this bad R and for every bad R there's a
good R right and a good R is something
that actually discovers the incorrect
multiply and and given that for every
bad R there's a good R you know half of
the RS are good RS right that's it so
I'll write it out that's the essence of
the argument and I'll go a little more
slowly so hopefully you you'll get that
but so let's look at the case where Dr
equals zero case because that's the
interesting case right that's the case
where the r is bad even though we had an
incorrect multiply and you get this um
um uh this uh I should have said false U
you get a false positive right so I'm
sorry I think just before I I said false
negative but I meant false positive
right so you you have a false positive
in this case um and D equal AB minus c
not equal to zero implies there exists
an i and J such that D J is not equal to
zero okay um and there's just one entry
at least if you say that Matrix is not
equal to zero there's got to be an entry
that's not equal to zero so let's take a
look at that entry and let's just draw
it out that's my D
Matrix and there's going to be an an i
and a
j so that's my I row and my jth column
and there you go I have an entry here
which is D J and uh I'm just picking
that I don't care what I and J are but
there's got to be an entry that's not
equal to zero now I'm going to create a
vector v
right so this Vector is a is is not R
it's a vector v that is chosen uh
deterministically given the DI where
it's got zeros
everywhere except at at
VJ so if this is the if this is the J
entry columnwise everywhere else you got
zero and you just got the one uh
associated with the uh The The J going
downward The The J entry okay so it's a
one hot Vector if you will it's got one
one so now if you multiply these two
things
out you know that you're going to get
something and we can call this uh
DV right so you take D and you multiply
it by V uh Matrix multiplied by a a
vector um you're you're guaranteed given
that all of these are zero when I do my
this times that plus this times this
plus this times this all of these are
going to produce zero this times one is
going to produce something that's non
zero and then all the other ones are
going to produce zero right so I'm just
adding a bunch of zeros to this nonzero
multiplied by one so I'm going to get
something that's non zero right all make
sense um so I'm going to see something
here which is the J
entry that's not equal to
zero all and so that implies that DV is
not equal to zero and in particular what
I'm saying is um DV of J so if I just
look at that entry that is
identically D J which is not equal to
zero because I'm multiplying it by one
and I'm adding a bunch of zeros to
that's it okay yeah question J or
I um so I picked the J here so um I
think I'm going J J
right that make sense right so I go one
if this was if J was seven and and this
is seven down then I'm going it would be
it would be the the the the the seventh
would it because this is going to turn
into
that right
okay um now either way I if I you know
picked it in the middle uh it doesn't
really matter the point is there's going
to be one entry so hang in there there's
going to be one entry that's non zero
okay if you didn't quite get that um so
di J is not zero and this is one more
observation we're going to make in order
to do the counting of these bad RS
because this is a this is a bad r that
we're looking at if you say that Dr
equals zero um we've created a v that
has nothing to do with r but we're going
to use the V to go from a bad R which is
our example here to a good one right
that's pretty much it uh that's the last
step here so what we're going to do is
we're going to
take any
r that can be
chosen by our
algorithm and such that you know Dr
equals zero because that's the case that
we're looking at and um we're going to
compute RP Prime which is r + V
okay we're just going to and this
remember this is mod 2 arithmetic uh
you're only going to get zeros and ones
so if you have 1 plus 1 it gives you
zero obviously 0 plus 0 gives you zero
and uh the other cases are clear and
this plus here remember is also other
thing that's important is this is not
only mod 2 um these are all vectors so
your R is a vector uh and you can think
of it as a column Vector that's how I
drew it uh you you're adding up
a column Vector with a V that's a column
Vector the way I drew that uh you could
do this with rows if you like but it's
just notation and you're going to
compute an r r Prime here um what can
you
say
about Dr R
Prime
someone yeah go
ahead it's not zero uh and and uh you'll
get a I'll give you a frisbee but then
you can explain I can you stand up I
don't want to take this lady's head
off um so can you explain
why
R absolutely right so essentially what
we have is this is simply woo yellow um
Dr +
V uh
highlights um 0+
DV not equal to zero all right do we
like yellow or do we like
white yellow is fine um so so that's
pretty much it so what's cool about this
is this final step which I think you've
gotten but I'm just going to say it out
loud now which is that um R to R
Prime um is one:
one for for any given R such that Dr
equals zero
um given the situation where you know
capital D is not equal to zero and
there's some Di and there could be many
ds I just need one I've constructed
based on that di this this V Vector
which has the J entry corresponding to
the V Vector being a one with all of the
other entries being a zero but I can now
create an R to r that is one to one in
the sense that um if um R Prime equal =
r +
V and that equals R
Prime + V right so if I ever have a
situation where in order to show this
one to one I want to say that it's not
many to one right so or even two to one
so if I have an R Prime that equals r +
V and you tell me that RP Prime also
equals R prime plus v i can make the the
argument that R and R Prime
are exactly the same right so
then Ral R Prime right so what am I
saying there um I'm just I'm just saying
that um for any given any given R uh
that this has Dr equals Zer I can
twiddle at the J element of that R and
go from 0 to 1 or 1 to zero if you tell
me that there's a DI J somewhere in that
Matrix
that uh uh is non zero and I do that
little twiddle remember it's all zeros
and ones Boolean matrices so if I do one
twiddle um it it's a one to one uh if I
do two twiddles and I go you know one to
zero I'm back to I'm back to one again
and that's all this says because you
have mod two that's all that says right
so one little tweak um and I'm going to
be able to take a bad R and turn it into
a good R because the good R the r Prime
in this case has Dr Prime not equal to
zero okay and that's it that's my
counting argument and All That Remains
is to essentially close this by saying
um just to write this out uh to get to
the to get to the final
claim and get the 1/2 the one: one
essentially gives you the 1/2 half of at
least half of these things are going to
be good RS um if you had if you had a
Dr if you had a Dr that's not equal to
zero uh and that's that's the case that
you have here um then we're going to
discover an RP Prime such that the Dr
Prime is not equal to zero and R to RP
Prime is a one to one mapping
um and so the number of R
Prime for
which Dr Prime is not equal to zero is
greater than or equal to the
number of
R for
which Dr equals z right and so that
implies that the probability
of
Dr not equal to zero so if you just
choose an R this is now a randomly
chosen
r i mean not that others weren't but I'm
I'm treating it a little bit differently
here this was a specific R for which Dr
was equal to zero I made an argument
that you can always get this R Prime 1
to one such that Dr Prime is not equal
to zero and now going back to what I had
initially with respect to the claim here
the r here was a a randomly chosen R I'm
I'm saying thanks to this little
argument this line up up top I'm I'm
going to be able to say this is greater
than or equal to2
okay cool any questions
yeahum on the last colum
be this should be I
yes people agree with that majority
vote all right I'm good let's make that
an
ey oh yeah of course once you do that
yeah once you do that you you you you
have to have an eye there
good um so you're looking at uh you're
looking at a particular entry it it it
makes a difference whether you used a
column or a row if I done uh um now that
I remember
uh um if you think if you turn this into
a a a row Matrix and this becomes a row
Matrix you'll essentially get the dvj
okay so it depends on which way you look
at it but thanks for pointing that out
um
it's the specifics of I andj weren't
particularly important to uh the proof
itself uh the key thing is you zoom in
on a particular entry that is not equal
to zero uh and then you tweak uh that
entry corresponding to the R so uh once
you tweak that you make that zero or one
or one to zero you can get this result
um and uh uh I'm sorry I'm pointing the
wrong spot this result uh and and then
you get your you get your claim okay so
summarize uh we have a bound we run it
over and over uh and we get it to the
point where we can have a 01 prob ility
that uh if the matrices were multiplied
uh incorrectly uh that you wouldn't
discover that because you ran it long
enough that for enough hours
independently chosen that that
probability becomes as low as possible
okay so that was uh um Monte Carlo um
let's do uh a Las Vegas algorithm and
you guys are probably thinking my
goodness another sorting algorithm uh
after I don't know 17 different sorting
algorithms but let me this all sorting
algorithms that you've ever learned so
far right so mer sort doesn't work um
and the reason it doesn't work in
practice uh if you're really into
performance is because um is is because
of um the auxiliary space that merge
sort requires right so if you recall um
there's uh the notion of uh in place
sorting so let's uh move on to the next
thing here which is
um uh quick sort which is a new sorting
algorithm and I want to motivate it for
just a couple of
minutes and the primary motivation
really is
practical performance not U asmic
complexity so I I'll be uh upfront about
that uh it's it's it's all about
practical performance corresponding to
quick sort uh and uh quick sort is divid
and concer algorithm randomized
algorithm invented in
62 unlike merge
sword it's got two interesting
properties uh the first is that it's in
place like I just said so no auxiliary
space in merge
sort um you can try and get around
this uh no I should say order n
auxiliary space you need U uh you need a
little temporary
uh variable in order to do swapping uh
but uh you have uh you don't have the
order and auxilary space so you don't
have to constantly allocate and remember
n could be large it could be in the
billions or trillions so uh from that
standpoint quick sort ends up winning
simply because of relatively mundane
things like memory allocation in uh uh
your your computer uh and uh the other
interesting thing about quick sort in
relation to sord is that all the
work is in the Divide
step um so in merge s remember we just
split and we recurse uh and what happens
uh when you when you uh come back is you
have to do the the the the finger
merging algorithm uh by looking at the
two sorted arrays and looking at what uh
the new uh merge array is going to look
like so the work is in the merge uh but
uh in quick sort the work is going to be
in the Divide because we're going to
have to um do a bunch of work um
associated with figuring out how to keep
the partitions balanced and a little bit
like uh we had to do when we did uh
median finding back a couple of weeks
ago um I'm going to talk about three
different variants of quick sort the the
variant that we're going to spend the
most time on is the Las Vegas quick sort
where we'd like to show that it's
probably fast and uh make a statement
about the expected
runtime uh but we'll get to that uh by
talking about a couple of other
interesting variants and this will uh be
uh elaborated on to some extent um in
section
tomorrow so before we get to variance of
course let's try and set up the
structure corresponding to quick
sort and as always we have an N
element
array
a you have
divide that corresponds to
picking a pivot
element X in a and then we're going to a
partition
the
array into a sub
arrays and what we have here is uh this
little picture should uh make things
clear and you kind of saw this um in the
median finding but here we go again
let's assume all the array elements are
unique um we have l e and G
uh L is less than G is greater than and
so your pivot element is going to break
this array up into L and G where you got
all the elements uh that are less on the
left and all the elements that are
greater on the right and you're going to
recurse um on the
LNG so recursively
sort
subarrays LNG
um combine is
Trivial or merge is Trivial because
you've already broken things up thanks
to the pivoting and uh you just
concatenate those arrays and that's why
you can do this in in place uh there's
no issues uh you're really recursively
sorting sub arrays you are moving things
around a little bit uh when you do the
partition obviously the initial array
may have all the elements uh you may
pick the pivot such that the pivot is
all the way on on the on the right hand
side in the sense that it's a large
element uh that is not necessarily a
good thing we'll talk about that but if
you pick a an an interesting privot or a
good pivot uh you're going to have to
move the elements in the array U to the
left of the pivot if they're less than
the pivot and you got to move the
elements to the right if they're to the
right of the pivot um non-trivial piece
of code not super complicated but you
can look at U
clrs at page 171 to look at in place uh
partitioning uh where you don't have to
use uh another order end space uh to
move these elements around such that
they look like that picture that I have
up there starting from some random
starting point right so you want to have
your um uh the picture that you have
here and you need to go from some well
the very same array uh needs to and X is
somewhere here and you know you got X+
one here and X plus xus one here for
example uh you need to move those things
around so they look like l e and G and U
uh that's something that U that you can
do in place and you can look at the code
for that uh in clrs I won't I won't
cover that here um so let's look at a
bunch of different variants
corresponding to quick sort um and
there's some real simple ones each of
these we can knock off with respect to U
uh
complexity uh and runtime uh fairly
easily with with one exception that
we'll spend some time on which is the
Las Vegas uh quick sword but we'll call
these different names let's talk about
the basic quick sort which is also a
useful algorithm that people use uh in
practice and uh amazingly this algorithm
uh is is simply something that says I'm
just going to constantly pivot on either
the first entry or the last entry so I'm
going to pick my Pivot to be A1 and um
when I pick my Pivot to be A1 it's a
value that I'm talking about here x is a
value it's not an index it's the A1
value maybe that's 75 then I'm going to
create my L Matrix corresponding to this
pivot where all the entries are strictly
less than 75 and uh the G would be
strictly greater than 75 and I could do
that for A1 I could do that for a n so
remember that the pivot is a
value uh
um uh now if I look at this I'm going to
do the
partition uh given X just like you saw
there and this is going to be done in
order end time it makes sense that
you're going to look at every element
and you're going to move it to an
appropriate location to the left of X
which is the E array or to the right and
you do that that takes order end time
and as I mention you can you can look at
this to see uh how this is done um in
place um so let's talk let's take a look
at the analysis of uh of basic quick
sort and what I'm interested in is of
course is the worst case analysis and I
asked this question I think uh before
when we were doing median finding but um
what is the worst case complexity of the
basic quick sort algorithm that chooses
the pivot as
A1 what is the
complexity order and square right it's
order n square and the reason for that
is that um you may have an array that is
uh uh sorted uh or reverse sorted you
know depending on whether you're picking
A1 or a n you can have a worst case
situation where one side
uh L or G has n minus one
elements and the other uh has zero
elements um and so if you look at our
recurrence associated with this you
could have TN which is t 0 + TN
minus1 plus Theta
n right and why do I have a Theta n here
well remember that I I still have to do
this divide step or this partition step
um in order to compute
this uh unbalanced array so I do have to
look at each of these elements and do
the comparison uh and maybe you know I I
don't actually have to move them but I
have to do the comparison with the with
the A1 which is the X pivot and uh
that's going to do the uh and in some
cases if I'm if I'm doing the wrong
thing reverse sorted I also have to do
the move either way I have a Theta n
complexity associated with um The Divide
step so if you go off and you look at
what happens with um
uh with this well you got uh
TN = tnus 1 + Theta n which ends up with
Theta n Square complexity so I hand
waved a little bit you know two weeks
ago uh for a similar analysis but you
can kind of look at it a little more uh
precisely here by writing the actual
recurrence out and you see that you get
the recurrence tnal tnus 1 plus Theta n
which is a an N Square uh result or the
the solution is n Square okay so basic
quick sword looks bad it's got a worst
case complexity of theta n Square uh it
works well on random inputs in practice
and it turns out that uh it's a fashion
of algorithm partly because it's in
place and it's easy to code that what
people do is uh uh they take their
inputs and they shuffle them uh they
just kind of you might get a bad input
and it might take you a long time to run
but if you take an input and you Shuffle
it and you do that in Theta n time uh
you just move things around and
randomize the input then effectively you
have a random input and this thing uh
works pretty well in practice right now
what is pretty well well we're going to
do an analysis that is going to um not
be exactly the analysis that you'd have
to do on basic quick sort with on on
random inputs but essentially you can
say that uh uh basic quick sort on
random inputs is going to run in um
expected Theta n log n time okay uh it
it's uh uh it's something that you'll
see a little bit of how to do that today
and and in in section perhaps for median
finding in section tomorrow uh but
that's uh all I wanted to say about
basic quick sort um it's a practical
algorithm um it does require a little
bit of shuffling up at the beginning and
then you can simply use the pivot A1 and
because you've done the shuffle uh
generally you get balanced partitions
the L and GS look balanced and you don't
end up with Theta n square if you have
any sort of balance associated with the
two partitions L and G you're going to
get a nice divide and concer which is
going to give you your Theta n log n
okay so so that's a basic quick sort um
there's uh another way to do this and so
this is a question for you guys suppose
I wanted to use the quick sort strategy
and get a uh a worst case Theta n log n
through an
intelligent pivot selection so I want to
do a pivot
selection
intelligently okay so um how would I get
under the structure of quick sort that
you see up there uh on the left there
how would I select a pivot such that I
get worst case Theta n log n
complexity go ahead linear median find
linear median finding Perfect that's
exactly right
um there was a gentleman at the back who
raised his hand and I decided I'd
chicken
out um I think one time to the back of
the room is enough for a day right you
can you can come have a frisbee left
hopefully you can get one right um so U
the intelligent pivot selection
algorithm is the median finding
algorithm because that's going to
guarantee me that I'm going to get
balanced partitions if you tell me that
A1 and remember we're talking medians
are values right so don't get confused
with indices when I say something is a
median I'm talking about the value that
all of given its value that all these
other n /2 uh values that are less than
it uh uh roughly speaking and N over two
values that are greater than it uh uh
and so A1 I have no idea whether it's
large or small and uh so I couldn't say
much about it but if I want to be worst
case and I want to guarantee that I I
have balanced partitions I can choose
the median and if I choose the median
every time I'm going to get perfectly
balanced partitions right they're going
to be half on the left and half on the
right um so and we do know a way
of getting balanced partitions we can
guarantee
that
balanced
LNG using median
selection that runs in Theta n time and
we showed that a couple of weeks
ago now that median selection algorithm
was non-trivial okay uh it uh it it had
this weird thing where you broke things
up into
five arrays of size subarrays of size
five and you found a median of medians
etc etc but we argued that the whole
thing ran in Theta n time which is
important and so now if you look at uh
what happens with quick sort and if I
write the recurrence for quick sort
thanks to selecting a median I
effectively have balanced partitions so
I have 2 TN /2 this is
thanks
to the median pivot median based
pivoting that's
important otherwise it won't work and
then uh just to be very clear here um I
got two Theta n terms okay uh the first
Theta n term is the
recursive median selection
um and then the second Thea end term is
of course the divide or the
partition but it's important to to
realize that now I have a lot of work in
the divide a lot of work I have to do an
intelligence selection using this
recursive median finding algorithm and I
also have to do the moves comparing and
then generate the L and the g arrays
okay so those are the two Theta NS they
obviously Theta n but but I wanted to
make it clear that there's two things
going on here right and we all know that
that is Theta n log n worst case all
right so there is a way of using the
quick sort structure template and
getting a Theta n log n worst case
algorithm which doesn't work in practice
uh because it's just too complicated
right you know what's going on here is
uh you have a recursion at every level
of recursion you're going uh you know
calling another recursive algorithm to
find the median right so if you go code
this up um it loses to merge sword uh in
practice you can do all of this in place
but because of all these recursive calls
it doesn't work well in practice right
but it's good to know and so this is an
good example I think uh which we don't
do a lot off in 046 where you get a
sense of the difference between asmic
complexity and performance so
while uh the median finding algorithm
has better asmic complexity where SK
case it really loses in practice to the
basic quick sort which essentially is a
bit of a hack where you take an input
and you randomize the input and you you
run it with A1 as the pivot or a n as
the pivot right so um is
there is there a different way that um
you can actually get to a Las Vegas
algorithm and it turns out randomized
quick sort is something that uh uh you
can you can you can build and use which
is a bit different from basic quick
swort uh and certainly different from
median finding but it kind of has a
little bit in common with them and it's
our uh example of a vas
algorithm so what happens at randomized
quick sort um X is
chosen at
random from the array a so you're not
choosing A1 or a n you might just flip
uh uh well effectively a an n-sided Dot
and uh uh pick a particular index and
then go grab the the pivot corresponding
to the value at that index okay I mean
you're not going to randomize over
values you don't know what these values
are but you can uh pick an a random
index and then grab the pivot based on
the value at that index um and so at
each recursion a random choice is made
and um the expected time so now we're
saying something different we're making
um a a stronger theoretic statement that
the expected time when you do
this um for all
inputs arrays a is order order n log n
and so now this is not worst case time
it's expected time right so this is
going to be our analysis um uh in the
last few minutes here to um analyze not
randomized quick sort uh but a slight
variant of randomized quick sort uh that
is going to show you that you can run uh
randomized quick sort and this variant
in order n log end time right so um not
quite sure what's going to happen in
section tomorrow but the full
analysis um is in the book um you should
you you should read it uh it's as you
can see it's a it's a couple of pages uh
that includes the description of quick
sort uh that I have already uh but what
we're going to do here is analyze uh s a
variant quick sort which is a little bit
easier to analyze and it gives you the
sense of uh why in fact uh the
randomized quick sort is going to run in
expected time and this analysis is easy
to do in a in in a few minutes so uh
we'll do that and tomorrow you'll see
either a median finding analysis that's
similar to that analysis in
clrs or precisely that analysis
depending on what uh your ta want to do
so this particular variant we're going
to call paranoid quick sort right and so
this quick sort um is U is paranoid in
the sense that um it's going to be
afraid of getting unbalanced partitions
and it's going to keep trying to get
balanced partitions so it's going to uh
try to get a balanced partition it's
going to check and then if it fails it's
going to try again and so at the end of
it I there's obviously a an expect
expectation associated with the number
of tries that you need in order to get a
balanced partition but it just sort of
flips the problem on its head and says
you know what um I'm just going to
guarantee a balanced partition from a
probabilistic standpoint and it might
take me a little bit longer to get there
but that's what Las Vegas algorithms are
all about uh it they're probably fast
and once I get a balanced partition I'm
in good shape because I can go do my
recursion and I get uh my divide and
conquer working properly right so what
is paranoid quick sword absolutely
straightforward you could probably guess
given my description uh let's just
choose uh a
pivot uh to be a
random
element of
a uh perform the
partition and and then uh Val is a
repeat uh so uh we're going to go off
and we say
until the
resulting
partition is such
that the cardinality of L is less than
or equal to
3/4 of a cardinality of a and the
cardinality of G is less than or equal
to 3/4 the cardinality of a right so I'm
allowing you a certain amount of
imbalance but not a lot right um and and
that's it that's recursive U uh I'm
sorry a paranoid quick sort uh you
obviously are doing that in each level
of the recursion and at each level of
the recursion your L and G are going to
be at most a factor of three apart so
you might get one quarter and 3/4 if
you're lucky you'll get a half and a
half uh but the worst case given uh that
you're going to be exiting out of this
Loop is one quarter and 3/ quter okay so
uh as always you know you have a simple
algorithm and it's uh not
completely clear how you're going to get
to um expected n log end time but uh
it's not difficult uh basically what we
have to do is we have to try and figure
out what the probability of a good call
is over here uh a good pivot choice and
what the probability of a of a of a bad
pivot choice is and we have to uh
obviously given the uh potential
imbalance we have to write the
recurrence associated with that but
let's take a look
at uh the pivots here and um what can we
say about uh the sizes of
LG uh if you just did a random pivot
well a bad call is
when your you get uh
uh something in L or G that is less than
one
quarter uh and a good call
is when you get 1/2 somewhere between 1
half and um uh uh uh well roughly if you
look at uh the choice of the pivot so
what I have up here is is the choice of
the pivot if my Pivot is out here I have
um I have a very small L and all of the
thing on the right is G if the pivot is
here I have a relatively small l and a
large G if the pivot is over here I'm
good um I got one quarter uh and three
qus the pivot is over here I got 1/2 and
one2 and so on and so forth and so this
part is bad this part is bad and the
middle part is good right so that's all
that this picture shows um so a
call is good
with what
probability given that picture a call is
good with what
probability it's greater than or equal
to 1/2 right
so um and
so what you can now write simply is uh
if
TN uh is the time required to sort the
array um essentially what you can write
is uh you can say TN is T of n /
4+ T of 3 n /
plus
expected number of
iterations in terms of getting a good
partition time C * n and there's a
reason why I'm putting C in here as
oppos to Theta that will become clear in
just a second because I can't really
apply the Master theorem to this uh
given what I have with respect to TN /4
and 3n /4 right so so what I have here
is I'm looking at the case
where um I could get an imbalance
partition but the imbalance is bounded
so I could get I'd have n over4 on one
side and 3 n over4 on the other side but
I'm not going to have n over 5 and you
know 4 n over 5 or what have you um and
so that's the two recursive calls so
that's hopefully uh easy to see uh the
part that is new here is simply the
complexity of this code that you see
here which is obviously a the randomized
algorithm that's exactly where the
randomness comes in because you're
picking a random pivot and you're
checking it and so um this is going to
run a certain number of times and U we
can figure out what the expectation is
in just a minute but I have C * n
because uh this is constant time to
choose the random number whe assume that
performing the partition uh partition is
is uh is C * n or Theta n and that's why
I have this up there so this we're going
to call as a
CN um and so um expected number of
iterations given what I have what can I
say about the expected number of
iterations using U using uh simple
probability rules what is that two right
one / P all of them are independent so
this is this is two and so um uh what I
have
here uh is uh something that I think you
might have seen this before uh but it's
worth drawing the tree out and seeing it
one more time in case uh um it didn't U
fully registered the first time or you
didn't actually see it uh in6 or
regation but um what I now have is T of
N I want to solve T of n n = t of n / 4
+ T of 3n / 4 + 2 *
CN right um and um again like I said I
didn't put Theta n in here because as
you'll see when I draw this uh this tree
out uh because it's not a master theorem
uh invocation uh it's worth looking at
it from a constant Factor standpoint to
really get the sense of how all of this
works out um and so if I draw the tree
of execution I start counting um
basically what I have is 2 CN up at the
top I have 1 over4 * 2 CN over here I
have 3 over4 * 2 CN over here and then
this 1 over4 might go 1 over6 * 2 CN
over here and this might go 3 over 16 *
2 CN over here and and this would go um
I guess it would be 3 over 16 * 2 CN and
then uh 9 over 16 * 2 CN Etc so this is
an unbalanced tree because you have uh
an unbalanced partition up on top and
now you want to count up all the work uh
that this uh uh this tree does if you
collect up all of the operations then
that's going to tell you what T of n is
because that's all the work that you
have to do in order to uh finish up the
top level of recursion and what you can
say is if you look at this side here all
the way to the right hand side you're
going to have log
of to the base 4 over3 * 2 CN levels
right so that's just simply every time
you're multiplying by 3 over 4 when do
you get down to uh the number one and
that's log of 4 over3 and then over here
it's a little bit easier to think about
because it's a power of two you're going
to have log of four to the base 4 * 2 CN
levels and really it doesn't really
matter honestly when we go to astics but
it's worth seeing I think uh just to get
a sense of um why it all works out uh
regardless of whether it's uh N4 or or
or a different constant here or whether
it's balanced or unbalanced the tree
looks a little bit different um it it's
sort of weird you know it's got a uh uh
fewer levels here and and more levels
there so s of tilted this way uh but uh
eventually you get down to uh Theta 1
constants down
below um and basically what you can see
if you just add it up uh is 1 over4 + 3
over4 is 1 1 over 16 3 over 16 obviously
those are all uh those are all uh end up
end up being one so you have 2
CN
work at each
level and uh if you just go ahead and be
pessimistic about it uh there's
maximum of log 4
over3 times 2 CN
levels
and that's pretty much it um obviously
now you can start ignoring the constants
uh you just keep the log here you don't
care what the Bas is you got an N here
so drop the 2 C drop the 4 over3 drop
the 2C and you get your end log app okay
so that's pretty much it uh I'll uh
stick around here for questions uh but
you got an example of um of a Monte
Carlo algorithm you got an example of a
Las Vegas algorithm and tomorrow in
section you'll see a slightly more
involved analysis for something that
looks a lot closer to the randomized
quick sort so see you next time